HEART DISEASE PREDICTION MODEL
LAB REPORT DETAILS

Project Name:
Heart Disease Prediction Using Machine Learning

Prepared For:
Machine Learning / Artificial Intelligence Lab Report

Project Type:
Binary classification model with a graphical user interface


1. INTRODUCTION

Heart disease is one of the most serious health problems in the world. Many
people suffer from heart-related conditions, and early risk estimation can help
people become more aware of their health. In this project, a machine learning
model is used to predict whether a person may have heart disease or not based on
some medical and clinical input values.

The model does not replace a doctor. It is not a medical device. It is only an
educational machine learning project. The purpose of this project is to show how
a machine learning model can learn from a tabular dataset and then make a
prediction for a new patient profile.

The project includes:

- A heart disease dataset in CSV format.
- A trained machine learning model saved as a joblib file.
- An improved trained model saved as another joblib file.
- Python scripts for running and evaluating the model.
- A Flask-based web application.
- A beautiful HTML, CSS, and JavaScript graphical user interface.


2. MAIN OBJECTIVE

The main objective of this project is to build and run a heart disease
prediction system. The system takes medical input values from the user and gives
a prediction about the possibility of heart disease.

The output of the model is binary:

0 = No heart disease predicted
1 = Heart disease predicted

The system also shows the probability of heart disease. This probability helps
the user understand how confident the model is about the prediction.


3. PROBLEM STATEMENT

The problem is to predict whether a patient has heart disease or not using
structured medical data.

This is a supervised machine learning problem because the dataset already has
input features and the correct output label. The model learns the relationship
between the input values and the target label.

Since there are only two possible output classes, this is a binary
classification problem.


4. DATASET INFORMATION

Dataset file name:
heart-disease.csv

Dataset/model source:
Hugging Face - BrejBala/Heart-Disease-Prediction

Source URL:
https://huggingface.co/BrejBala/Heart-Disease-Prediction

Source note:
The local heart-disease.csv file used in this project was taken from this
Hugging Face repository/model card. The source page documents the same tabular
heart-disease data shape used here: 303 rows, 14 columns, 13 input features, and
one target column.

Source license:
MIT, as listed on the Hugging Face repository page.

Number of rows:
303

Number of columns:
14

Number of input features:
13

Number of target columns:
1

Target column name:
target

Target distribution:

- target = 1: 165 records
- target = 0: 138 records

This means the dataset is fairly balanced. There are slightly more records of
patients with heart disease than records of patients without heart disease.


5. INPUT FEATURES

The model uses 13 input features. These features are medical and clinical values.
Some values are continuous numeric values, and some values are encoded category
values.

The features are:

1. age
   This means the age of the patient in years.

2. sex
   This is the encoded sex value.
   In this dataset, commonly:
   0 = female
   1 = male

3. cp
   This means chest pain type.
   It is an encoded categorical value.
   Values can be 0, 1, 2, or 3.

4. trestbps
   This means resting blood pressure.
   It is measured in mm Hg.

5. chol
   This means serum cholesterol.
   It is measured in mg/dL.

6. fbs
   This means fasting blood sugar.
   It is a binary encoded value.
   0 = fasting blood sugar is not greater than 120 mg/dL
   1 = fasting blood sugar is greater than 120 mg/dL

7. restecg
   This means resting electrocardiographic result.
   It is an encoded categorical value.
   Values can be 0, 1, or 2.

8. thalach
   This means maximum heart rate achieved.

9. exang
   This means exercise-induced angina.
   It is a binary encoded value.
   0 = no
   1 = yes

10. oldpeak
    This means ST depression induced by exercise relative to rest.

11. slope
    This means the slope of the peak exercise ST segment.
    It is an encoded categorical value.
    Values can be 0, 1, or 2.

12. ca
    This means the number of major vessels.
    It is an encoded value.
    Values can be 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4.

13. thal
    This means thalassemia category.
    It is an encoded categorical value.
    Values can be 0, 1, 2, or 3.

Important note:
The categorical values must use the same encoding as the training dataset.
If the encoding is changed, the model prediction may become incorrect.


6. TARGET VARIABLE

The target variable is named target.

The target has two possible values:

0 = No heart disease
1 = Heart disease present

The model learns to predict this target value from the 13 input features.


7. DATA PREPARATION

The dataset was loaded using pandas. The input features and target column were
separated.

The input data was stored in X.
The target data was stored in y.

The dataset was divided into training data and testing data.

Train-test split:

- Training data: 242 rows
- Testing data: 61 rows
- Test size: 20 percent
- Random state: 42

The random state was used so that the train-test split remains the same every
time the code is run. This helps make the result reproducible.


8. MODELS USED IN THE ORIGINAL NOTEBOOK

Several machine learning algorithms were explored in the notebook. The main
models were:

1. K-Nearest Neighbors
2. Logistic Regression
3. Random Forest Classifier

The notebook compared the performance of these models. After comparison and
tuning, a Random Forest model was saved as the original model file.


9. ORIGINAL SAVED MODEL

Original model file:
heart_disease_model.joblib

Original model type:
RandomForestClassifier

Important hyperparameters:

- n_estimators = 210
- max_depth = 3
- min_samples_split = 4
- min_samples_leaf = 19

This model was trained and saved using joblib.

The original model was able to run successfully, but it showed a scikit-learn
version warning on this computer. The warning happened because the model was
saved with a slightly different scikit-learn version than the version currently
installed locally.

This does not always break the model, but it is better to train and save a local
model again to avoid compatibility problems.


10. ORIGINAL MODEL TEST RESULT

The original saved model was evaluated on the same 20 percent test split.

Original model metrics:

- Accuracy: 0.8689
- Precision: 0.8529
- Recall: 0.9062
- F1 score: 0.8788
- ROC-AUC: 0.9364

Original confusion matrix:

                Predicted 0    Predicted 1
Actual 0            24             5
Actual 1             3            29

Meaning of the confusion matrix:

- True Negative = 24
- False Positive = 5
- False Negative = 3
- True Positive = 29

The original model correctly detected 29 out of 32 heart disease cases in the
test set.


11. IMPROVED MODEL

An improved model was created to get better performance while keeping the
prediction process reliable.

Improved model file:
heart_disease_model_improved.joblib

Improved model type:
Soft Voting Classifier

The improved model combines:

1. Logistic Regression pipeline
2. Random Forest Classifier

The model uses soft voting. Soft voting means that the model combines the
predicted probabilities of the individual models and then makes a final
prediction.

This is useful because different models may learn different patterns from the
same data. Combining them can sometimes give better and more stable results.


12. IMPROVED MODEL PIPELINE

The improved model uses a preprocessing pipeline for the Logistic Regression
part.

Numeric features:

- age
- trestbps
- chol
- thalach
- oldpeak

For numeric features:

- Missing values are handled using median imputation.
- Values are scaled using StandardScaler.

Categorical features:

- sex
- cp
- fbs
- restecg
- exang
- slope
- ca
- thal

For categorical features:

- Missing values are handled using the most frequent value.
- Categories are converted using OneHotEncoder.
- Unknown categories are ignored safely during prediction.

The Random Forest part uses the encoded numeric values directly, similar to the
original notebook approach.


13. IMPROVED MODEL TRAINING

The improved model was trained using the same heart-disease.csv dataset.

The training script:
train_improved_model.py

The script performs these steps:

1. Load the dataset.
2. Separate input features and target.
3. Split the data into training and testing sets.
4. Build the improved model.
5. Tune selected hyperparameters using GridSearchCV.
6. Evaluate the original saved model.
7. Evaluate the improved model.
8. Save the improved model as heart_disease_model_improved.joblib.
9. Save the model report as model_report.json.

The search scoring metric used during tuning was F1 score.

Best parameters found:

- lr__model__C = 10.0
- lr__model__class_weight = None
- weights = [1, 2]

This means the Random Forest part was given more weight than the Logistic
Regression part in the final soft voting model.


14. IMPROVED MODEL TEST RESULT

The improved model was evaluated on the same 20 percent test split.

Improved model metrics:

- Accuracy: 0.9016
- Precision: 0.9062
- Recall: 0.9062
- F1 score: 0.9062
- ROC-AUC: 0.9375

Improved confusion matrix:

                Predicted 0    Predicted 1
Actual 0            26             3
Actual 1             3            29

Meaning of the confusion matrix:

- True Negative = 26
- False Positive = 3
- False Negative = 3
- True Positive = 29

The improved model correctly predicted 55 out of 61 test cases.

The improved model reduced false positives from 5 to 3 compared with the
original model. It also kept the false negatives at 3. This is a useful
improvement because the model became more accurate without increasing the number
of missed heart disease cases in this test split.


15. COMPARISON BETWEEN ORIGINAL AND IMPROVED MODEL

Original model:

- Accuracy: 86.89 percent
- Precision: 85.29 percent
- Recall: 90.62 percent
- F1 score: 87.88 percent
- ROC-AUC: 93.64 percent

Improved model:

- Accuracy: 90.16 percent
- Precision: 90.62 percent
- Recall: 90.62 percent
- F1 score: 90.62 percent
- ROC-AUC: 93.75 percent

The improved model performs better in accuracy, precision, F1 score, and ROC-AUC.
The recall stayed the same on the test split.

This means the improved model is a better choice for the local web application.


16. CROSS-VALIDATION RESULT

The improved model was also evaluated using 5-fold cross-validation.

5-fold cross-validation means the dataset is divided into 5 parts. The model is
trained and tested multiple times using different parts of the data. This gives a
more general idea of model performance.

Improved model 5-fold cross-validation mean metrics:

- Accuracy: 0.8647
- Precision: 0.8569
- Recall: 0.9152
- F1 score: 0.8828
- ROC-AUC: 0.9204

These results show that the model performs reasonably well across multiple data
splits.


17. WHY ACCURACY ALONE IS NOT ENOUGH

Accuracy is useful, but it is not enough for a health-related prediction model.
In heart disease prediction, false negatives are especially important.

A false negative means:
The model predicts no heart disease, but the patient actually has heart disease.

This can be dangerous in real medical use. For this reason, recall is also very
important.

Recall means:
Out of all actual heart disease cases, how many were correctly found by the
model.

The improved model has a recall of 90.62 percent on the holdout test split and
91.52 percent mean recall in 5-fold cross-validation.


18. MODEL OUTPUT

The model gives two main outputs:

1. Prediction class
2. Probability of heart disease

Prediction class:

0 = No heart disease predicted
1 = Heart disease predicted

Probability:

The probability is a value between 0 and 1.

Example:

0.05 means about 5 percent probability.
0.55 means about 55 percent probability.
0.95 means about 95 percent probability.

In the web interface, this value is shown as a percentage.


19. SAMPLE PROFILES IN THE GUI

The prediction page includes three sample buttons:

1. Low
2. Medium
3. High

These samples are taken from real rows in the dataset and tested with the
improved model.

Low sample:

- Estimated probability: about 5.8 percent
- Risk band: Lower estimated risk
- Prediction: No heart disease

Medium sample:

- Estimated probability: about 55.3 percent
- Risk band: Elevated estimated risk
- Prediction: Heart disease present

High sample:

- Estimated probability: about 94.8 percent
- Risk band: High estimated risk
- Prediction: Heart disease present

These buttons are useful for demonstration because they show how the interface
changes for different model outputs.


20. MODEL FILES

Important model-related files:

1. heart-disease.csv
   This is the dataset. It was sourced from the Hugging Face repository:
   https://huggingface.co/BrejBala/Heart-Disease-Prediction

2. heart_disease_model.joblib
   This is the original saved Random Forest model.

3. heart_disease_model_improved.joblib
   This is the improved saved model used by the GUI.

4. train_improved_model.py
   This script trains the improved model and saves the model report.

5. run_model.py
   This script runs and evaluates a saved model from the command line.

6. model_report.json
   This file stores metrics and training details of the model.


21. HOW TO RUN THE MODEL FROM COMMAND LINE

To run the original model:

python run_model.py --model heart_disease_model.joblib

To train the improved model:

python train_improved_model.py

To run the improved model:

python run_model.py --model heart_disease_model_improved.joblib


22. WEB APPLICATION

The project also includes a Flask web application.

Main backend file:
app.py

The Flask app loads the saved model and provides routes for the web interface.

Important routes:

1. /
   This is the homepage.

2. /prediction
   This is the prediction page.

3. /predict
   This is the API route that receives input values and returns prediction
   results.

4. /health
   This route checks whether the app is running and which model is loaded.

The app uses the improved model by default:
heart_disease_model_improved.joblib

If the improved model is not available, the app can fall back to the original
model:
heart_disease_model.joblib


23. GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE

The GUI was built using:

- HTML
- CSS
- JavaScript
- Flask templates

Important GUI files:

1. templates/index.html
   This file contains the homepage layout.

2. templates/prediction.html
   This file contains the prediction page layout.

3. static/style.css
   This file contains the complete design and responsive styling.

4. static/app.js
   This file handles prediction page interactivity.

5. static/home.js
   This file handles the animated homepage canvas.

6. static/theme.js
   This file handles the light and dark theme feature.


24. HOMEPAGE DETAILS

The homepage is designed as the entry point of the application.

The homepage includes:

- Project brand name: Heart Risk AI
- A hero section
- Animated clinical monitor style background
- Start Prediction button
- Model Summary button
- Model performance metrics
- Detailed model summary section

The model summary section shows:

- Active model artifact
- Model type
- Dataset size
- Number of features
- Holdout accuracy
- Precision
- Recall
- F1 score
- 5-fold cross-validation result
- Holdout confusion matrix

The homepage also supports both light mode and dark mode.


25. PREDICTION PAGE DETAILS

The prediction page is the main working page of the project.

The prediction page includes:

- Patient input form
- Preset sample buttons
- Vitals section
- Clinical categories section
- Binary findings section
- Predict Risk button
- Reset button
- Live inference result panel
- ECG-style animated result strip
- Probability gauge
- Risk label
- Model performance metrics
- Important input signal list
- Medical disclaimer

The prediction form accepts all 13 input features required by the model.

When the user clicks Predict Risk, JavaScript collects the input values and sends
them to the Flask /predict route as JSON data.

The Flask backend converts the input into a pandas DataFrame and passes it to the
loaded machine learning model.

The model returns:

- Prediction class
- Probability of heart disease
- Risk band
- Important displayed input values

The result is then shown on the same page without reloading the page.


26. THEME FEATURE

The web interface includes a theme switch.

The user can switch between:

- Light mode
- Dark mode

The selected theme is stored in the browser using localStorage. This means the
theme choice remains saved even if the page is refreshed.

The theme affects:

- Homepage
- Prediction page
- Navigation bar
- Cards
- Input fields
- Result panel
- ECG canvas
- Model summary section

This makes the interface more user-friendly and visually attractive.


27. DESIGN FEATURES OF THE GUI

The GUI is designed to be clean, modern, and easy to use.

Important design features:

- Clear homepage
- Separate prediction page
- Simple navigation
- Clean input fields
- Slider controls for numeric values
- Select boxes for categorical values
- Toggle-style controls for binary values
- Beautiful result card
- Probability gauge
- ECG-style visual element
- Responsive layout for different screen sizes
- Light and dark theme support

The GUI helps users understand the model output more easily than a command-line
program.


28. LIMITATIONS OF THE PROJECT

This project has some limitations:

1. Small dataset
   The dataset has only 303 rows. This is small for a real medical machine
   learning system.

2. Educational purpose only
   The model is not clinically validated.

3. Not a medical device
   The model should not be used for real diagnosis.

4. Encoded categorical values
   Some medical categories are encoded as numbers. If the encoding is not
   understood correctly, input mistakes can happen.

5. Dataset may not represent all populations
   The dataset may not include enough diversity from different age groups,
   regions, and medical backgrounds.

6. Model can make wrong predictions
   No machine learning model is perfect. False positives and false negatives are
   possible.


29. ETHICAL AND MEDICAL WARNING

This model is only for learning and demonstration.

It should not be used as the only basis for medical decisions.

If a person has chest pain, breathing difficulty, heart-related symptoms, or any
health concern, they should contact a qualified doctor or medical professional.

The prediction result should be treated as a machine learning output, not as a
medical diagnosis.


30. FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS

This project can be improved in several ways:

1. Use a larger dataset.
2. Use more recent and diverse medical data.
3. Add better medical explanations for categorical values.
4. Add SHAP or feature contribution explanations.
5. Add user input validation messages in the GUI.
6. Add charts for feature importance.
7. Add model comparison inside the web interface.
8. Add a database to store prediction history.
9. Add login and admin dashboard features.
10. Deploy the app online using a cloud platform.


31. CONCLUSION

This project successfully builds a heart disease prediction system using machine
learning. The original model used a Random Forest Classifier. An improved model
was created using a soft voting ensemble of Logistic Regression and Random
Forest. The improved model achieved better test accuracy and F1 score than the
original model.

The final system includes both backend model prediction and a beautiful web
interface. The GUI allows users to enter patient values, choose sample profiles,
switch between light and dark themes, and view the prediction result in a clear
and attractive way.

The project is useful for understanding the complete machine learning workflow:

- Data loading
- Data splitting
- Model training
- Model tuning
- Model evaluation
- Model saving
- Backend integration
- Frontend GUI design
- User interaction

Overall, this is a complete educational machine learning project that combines
data science, model development, and web application design.
